The Berenstain Bears Picture and text by Stan and Jan Berenstain1. 1974 New Baby  Down a sunny dirt road, over a log bridge, up a grassy hill, deep in Bear Country, lived a family of bears–Papa Bear, Mama Bear and Small Bear. They lived in a large tree which Papa Bear had hollowed out and made into a house. It was a very fine house. This is what it looked like inside. It was fun growing up in Bear Country...helping Papa get honey from the old bee tree...helping Mama bring the vegetables in from the garden. There were all sorts of interesting things for a small bear to do and see in Bear-Country. Small Bear felt good growing up in a tree...in his own room...in the snug little bed that Papa Bear had made for him when he was a baby. But one morning, it did not feel so good. Small Bear woke up with pains in his knees and aches in his legs. "Small Bear, you have outgrown your little bed," said Papa Bear, as he hitched up his overalls and buttoned his shoulder straps. "Today, we shall go out into the woods and make you a bigger one!" With that, he ate his breakfast of piping-hot porridge...washed it down with a gulp of honey from the family pot...took up his ax and was out the door. "But, Papa," called Small Bear, following after him. "What will happen to my little bed?" "Don't worry about that, Small Bear," said Mama Bear as she closed the door after him. She smiled and patted her front, which had lately grown very big and round. "You've outgrown that snug little bed just in time!" He tested the ax to see if it was sharp, then headed off into the woods. "What will happen to my little bed?" Small Bear asked again as he caught up with Papa Bear in the woods. Papa had chopped down a tree and was splitting it into boards. "We will have a new baby soon who will need that little bed," said papa Bear as he whacked off another board. "A new baby?" asked Small Bear. (He hadn't noticed that Mama Bear had grown very round lately, although he had noticed it was harder and harder to sit on her lap.) "And it's coming soon?" "Yes, very soon!" said Papa Bear. With a final whack he split off the last board, which gave him enough wood to make a bigger bed for Small Bear. They made the bed a good size and took the rest of the day to chip and shave it smooth and neat. Then they carried it back to the tree and up to Small Bear's room. When they got there, Small Bear noticed right away that his old bed wasn't there any more. "My little bed!" said Small Bear. "It's already gone!" "You outgrew it just in time," called Mama Bear from the next room. "Come and see." It was true! There was his snug little bed with a new little baby in it. Small Bear had outgrown his snug little bed just in time for his new baby sister. And now he was a big brother! She was very little but very lively. As Small Bear learned over for a closer look, she popped him on the nose with a tiny fist. "Hmm," said Small Bear. "She has a pretty good punch for a little baby." That night he stretched out proudly in his bigger bed. "Aah!" he said. "Being a big brother is going to be fun." The next morning he woke up feeling fine, with no pains in his knees or aches in his legs. His nose was a little tender, though.MY HOUSE, MY HOUSE, MY HOUSE, MY HOUSE4. 1981 Moving Day The Bear family didn't always live in the big tree house down a sunny dirt road deep in Bear Country. Years ago, when Brother Bear was an only cub, they lived in a hillside cave halfway up Great Bear Mountain at the far edge of Bear Country. It was a comfortable cave, cool in summer and cozy in winter. And while it wasn't perfect–it tended to be dark and it dripped and trickled a bit–it was home, and the Bear family was quite happy there. Happy and busy. Mama Bear kept busy managing things and tending the vegetable patch. Papa Bear had plenty to do with his wood cutting and furniture making. And Brother Bear kept busy climbing, collecting rocks, and playing with his friends. But living on the mountainside wasn't perfect–it wasn't easy growing vegetables in the thin, rocky soil, and the trees Papa needed were getting fewer and farther between. But the sun was bright, the air was clear and sparkling, and the view was magnificent! Yes, the Bear family was happy and content living in their hillside cave halfway up Great Bear Mountain at the far edge of Bear Country... Until one day, Papa Bear said, "My dears, the time has come to move." "Move!?" cried Brother Bear. "That's right," said Papa. "The trees are getting few and far between on the mountainside." "Yes," said Mama, "and it's not easy raising enough vegetables for a growing family in this thin, rocky soil." "Where are we going to move to?" Brother asked. "To the valley," said Papa as he began putting lamps and things into a box. "The valley?" said Brother. The valley down there was nice to look at, but he wasn't so sure he wanted to live there. It was so far away. "What about my toys"? asked Brother. "We'll take them along, of course. Put them in there," said Papa, handing him a box. "And what about my books?" "We'll take them along, too," said Papa, handing him another box. "And what about my friends?" asked Brother. "We can't put them in a box and take them along!" "That's true," said Mama, lifting Brother onto her lap. "You'll be leaving your friends behind. Papa and I will, too. That's what happens when you move. But you can keep in touch with them. You can write, even visit, perhaps. And besides, you can make lots of new friends." "When are we going to move?" Brother wanted to know. "Tomorrow, bright and early," Mama told him. "The moving bears will be here first thing in the morning. That night, as Brother bedded down in in his corner of the cave, he wondered what it would be like to leave his old neighborhood and his old friends. He wondered what it would be like to move into a new neighborhood, making new friends. And then he began to wonder if he would ever fall asleep. And just when it began to seem that he never would, he did. The next morning, the moving bears came with their big truck and began moving the Bear family's things out of the cave. "Everything goes!" said Papa. And everything did. The moving bears were very fast, but very careful. Before long, the cave was empty. Then, after a fond farewell look at their old home, the Bear family said good-bye to their friends and neighbors, got into their car, and headed down the mountain. The big moving truck followed. Down, down the mountainside they went. After a few tight spots and a few wrong turns, they were in the rich green forest of the valley. "Look at that forest!" said Papa. "Now I shall have plenty of wood to cut." They passed farms with fine fields. "And look at that rich brown soil! What a vegetable garden I'll have!" said Mama. Brother was on the lookout for friends and playmates. But all he saw were a frog and some butterflies. And they didn't look very friendly. "Get ready!" said Papa, as they turned onto a sunny dirt road. "Just around this bend is our new home!" "But, it's a tree!" said Brother. "A tree house! said Papa. "A fine tree house–with a downstairs, and an upstairs, and an attic...and even a room of your own!" It was, indeed, a fine house–a whole house hollowed out of a great oak. It did need work–the paint was old, there were some broken steps, and some of the bark was loose–but Mama and Papa had great plans for fixing it up. As the movers took the Bears' things into their new home, the Bears imagined what it would look like when it was all fixed. It was going to be very beautiful. They were so busy imagining, that they didn't notice they had company. Their new neighbors had come with gifts of welcome. There were rabbits with carrot stew, bird and squirrel families with seeds and nuts, and a number of bear families with honeycombs, wild berries–and lots of cubs to make friends with. The Bear family felt very welcome in their new neighborhood. That night they went to bed very tired, but very happy. And when they got their tree hose all fixed up, it was just about perfect. TOYS BOOKS TOYS BOOKS TOYS BEAR COUNTRY MOVING FOR SALE SOLD5. 1982 In The Dark "Brother Bear," said Sister impatiently, "are you going to take all day to pick your books?" Sister and Brother Bear at the Bear Country Library. Sister had already chosen her books and was waiting at the check-out desk. "Hold your horses," said Brother. "I am looking for a good mystery." Sister Bear usually took out storybooks and books about nature–and sometimes books of poems. Brother liked those, too, but lately he'd become interested in mysteries–especially spooky ones. "Hey, this one looks good," he said finally. "Okay, let's check out." "Hmmm," said Sister, looking at the cover. It was called The Case of the Crying Cave. "It looks scary to me!" "Say! This is really good!" said Brother later that evening when the Bear family had settled down for some reading. "Would you like me to read it to you?" he asked Sister. Sister was looking at a storybook about three kittens who were arguing about which was the prettiest–and it was a little boring. "Or are you scared?" teased Brother. "Of course not," said Sister. She left her book on the floor and climbed onto the bench to sit beside him. The mystery began quietly. It told about some bear scouts who were on an overnight camp-out. When the scouts discovered a dark, secret cave, Brother's mystery began to get a little exciting. And when the cave began to cry and wail, it was anything but quiet! "'Who-o-o-o-o! cried the deep, dark mysterious cave,'" read Brother with a lot of expression. "'Who-o-o-o-o!'" "Stop!" said Sister, putting her fingers in her ears. "That's enough!" And she went back to her storybook. "Scaredy bear! Scaredy bear!" teased Brother. "And that's quite enough of that," added Papa Bear, looking up from his paper. At the cubs' bedtime Papa and Mama said good night, turned off the light, and left the cubs in the usual sleepy darkness. Outside the tree house the bright, busy sounds of day had given way to the soft, soothing sounds of night–the quiet conversation of frogs and toads, the soft cry of the owl, the sigh of the night wind. And if you listened very hard, you could almost hear the softest sound of all–the sound of lightning bugs switching their lights on and off, on and off. But inside the tree house Sister Bear wasn't even beginning to fall asleep. That night the dark didn't seem the least bit quiet and sleepy. In fact, it seemed like the spooky darkness of a scary cave. And the friendly old chest of drawers and funny clothes tree that Papa had made didn't seem so friendly and funny. They seemed more like cave creatures. So when brother decided to tease her a little more by making a wailing noise–a really spooky wailing noise—it gave her quite a scare. "Mama! Papa!" she cried. "Hurry! Come quick!" And come quickly they did. Papa rushed into the dark room and tripped over the clothes tree. Mama rushed in after Papa and tripped over him. In the commotion Sister fell out of bed and landed on both of them. Then Brother, who had started it all with his spooky wall, turned on the light. What a mess! Sister, still scared, was holding on to Papa. Papa was holding on to the toe he had stubbed. And Mama was looking for the night cap she had lost in the confusion. All three of them were pretty annoyed with Brother Bear. It turned out to be a very long night in the Bear's tree house. Papa and Mama tried to explain that there was nothing to be afraid of in the dark (except maybe running into a clothes tree and stubbing your toe)–but it didn't do any good. Sister absolutely refused to go to sleep with the light off. And Brother positively insisted that he couldn't fall asleep with the light on. The next morning the Bear family was very sleepy-eyed.  "Boy," said Brother, yawning. "I sure don't want to go through another night like that!" "Neither do I," said Papa. "And I think I have an idea that might help." He took Sister's hand. "Come with me," he said. "Where are we going?" she wanted to know. "Up to the attic." "The attic? But it's dark in the attic–even in the daytime." "I know," said Papa. "But there's something I want to show you. Anyway, there's nothing so special about the dark. It's just part of nature, like the light. It's your imagination that makes the dark seem spooky sometimes." "What's imagination?" asked Sister. "Imagination is what makes us think that chests of drawers and clothes trees are cave creatures." "I wish I didn't have one," said Sister. "Don't say that," said Papa. "A lively imagination is one of the best things a cub can have. It's imagination that lets us paint pictures, make up poems, invent inventions! The trick is to take charge of your imagination–and not let it take charge of you." When they got to the attic, Papa began to rummage through boxes, looking for something. Sister tried to follow Papa's advice and not let her imagination take charge. And it worked–a spooky shape turned out to be the shadow of some old tools. What looked like a giant was really some piled-up furniture. "Here it is!" said Papa. "My old night light! The one I used when I was a cub and had a little trouble falling asleep in the dark!" Sister couldn't quite believe that her big, powerful papa was ever afraid of the dark.  "Oh, sure," said Papa. "Most of us are at one time or another." "How about reading the rest of The Case of the Crying Cave?" Sister Bear asked Brother later that day. "Are you sure you want me to?" "Sure! I want to see how it turns out!" she insisted. When it turned out that there was nothing very spooky about the terrible wailing noise (it was caused by wind blowing across an opening in the roof of the case–like the noise you make when you blow across the top of a bottle), Sister was a little disappointed. And that night, when she and Brother were all settle down in the cozy glow of Papa's old night light, she said so. "I was pretty disappointed by the way The Case of the Crying Cave ended." "Why?" asked Brother. "Because," she said, "I was hoping the wailing would be a really spooky, scary monster!" And she leaned down from her bunk over Brother's and made a spooky, scary monster face at him. "Cut that out!" cried Brother. Then Sister went right to sleep. But Brother lay awake for quite some time listening to the owl hoots and thinking that maybe he'd had enough mysteries for a while. bear country library out, mysteries, cubs corner THE CASE OF THE CRYING CAVE WOOOOO BEAR COUNTRY GARDENS THE CASE OF THE CRYING THE CASE OF THE CRYING CAVE WOOOOO "A mysterious cave!" said the bear scouts. "We should explore it!" But before the scouts could go into the cave a wailing sound came from the cave. WHOO-O-O-O It was a strange sound and it frightened the scouts. "Help!" they cried. O-O-O-O-O WHO-O-O-O-O-O-O-O "The mystery is solved!" shouted Bear Scout Ted looking down from the hole in the top of the crying cave. The sounds are made by the wind. "I don't understand!" said Bear scout Fred. "I'll show you!" said Bear Scout Ted. "It's like when you blow across the top of a bottle." WHO-O-O-O-O-O-O6. 1982 Get in a Fight Most morning, in Bear Country, the sun rose to greet the day and the mockingbird sang its copycat songs outside an upstairs window of the bear's tree house. And inside the tree house Brother Bear and Sister Bear would wake up. Brother and Sister usually got along very well. They took turns nicely with the bathroom. They said "please" and "thank you" at breakfast. They often sat together on the school bus. And after school they worked together happily on their special project–their own backyard tree house. But one gray morning Brother and Sister didn't get along well at all! maybe it was the weather–or maybe it was because the mockingbird slept late. But whatever it was, Brother and Sister Bear got into a big fight... Sister Bear opened her eyes and stretched. Then she sat up and let her legs dangle over the edge of her bed–right in Brother Bear's face. She didn't do it to be rude. It was just one of those things that happens with bunk beds. But that morning Brother was not in a very good mood. "Sister!" he shouted. "Get your dopey feet out of my face!" "My feet aren't dopey, and they're not in your face!" she shouted back. "Get your dopey face out of my face!" snarled Brother. "You shout up!" snapped Sister...and before Brother could answer, she skipped into the bathroom ahead of him. She took a very long time...brushing her teeth, washing up, and brushing her fur. "You'd better come out of that bathroom!" shouted Brother, banging on the door. "Brother Bear," said Papa, coming out of his bedroom, "you know better than to shout at your sister." "But she's taking too long in the bathroom," complained Brother, "and she's doing it on purpose!" When Brother raised his fist to bang on the door again, it opened and out came Sister, all spruced up, "Good morning, Papa," she said, as nice as you please "Gr-r-r!" said Brother. Brother and Sister didn't say "please" and "thank you" that morning at breakfast–because they weren't speaking to each other. And they didn't sit together on the school bus. Sister sat in the front and Brother sat way in the back. That afternoon they made a line down the middle of their backyard tree house to show which half was whose. It wasn't much fun sitting up there in their tree house not speaking. Especially when it began to rain–hard! Later they kept on being mean by taking back the things they usually shared. Sister took back her modeling clay–which Brother had made into dinosaurs–and rolled it into one big lump. Brother took back his trucks and planes and put them on the top shelf where Sister couldn't reach them. They got so angry that they forgot they weren't speaking and began shouting at each other even louder than before. Then Papa lost his temper and began shouting at them to stop shouting. The neighbors didn't know which was worse–the big storm of the racket coming from the bear's house. Mama had quite enough. She put two fingers to her mouth and whistled–very very loudly. Papa and the cubs were so surprised that they stopped shouting. "I didn't know you could whistle like that, Mama," said Sister. "Well, I can. And I can also tell you," said Mama sternly, "that I've had quite enough of this foolish fighting. Why, I doubt you two even remember what you're fighting about!" The cubs tried to remember, but they couldn't. Mama took the cubs into her lab. "Everybody gets into an argument once in a while," she said. "Even folks who love each other very much." "You and I don't have arguments," said Papa. "Oh, yes, we do," said Mama. "No, we don't," argued Papa. "We're having one right now," said Mama, "about whether or not we have arguments!" While Papa thought that one over, Mama went on to say that occasional arguments are part of living together. "We get angry, even call each other names and say things we really don't mean–and after a while it's over." "Like the storm?" asked Sister. The rain had almost stopped, and the sun was beginning to shine through the clouds. "Yes," said Mama. "Like the storm." "Look!" said Papa. The sun shining on the last of the rain had made a rainbow. "A rainbow is something very beautiful that happens after a storm," said Mama, looking at the cubs. "you mean like making up after a big fight?" "Sort of," said Mama. So Brother and Sister Bear hugged and made up. And got along just beautifully–until the next time, anyway. SCHOOL BUS TWEE-E-ET8. 1983 The Truth It was a lazy sort of day in Bear Country. The air was so still that the leaves on the big tree house where the Bear family lived were hardly rustling. Except in the beehive, where the bees were always busy, nothing much seemed to be happening. It was the sort of day that somethings leads to mischief. Inside the tree house Brother and Sister Bear were sitting around not doing anything in particular. Brother was holding his soccer ball–he'd become interested in soccer and had been outside practicing free kicks. Sister was relaxing in an easy chair, thinking about what to do next. Neither Papa nor Mama Bear was around. Papa was in his shop working on some furniture, and Mama was out shopping. "I know what," said Sister. "Let's go gather some wild blackberries." Brother thought about that. "No," he said, "wild blackberries have too may thorns, and besides, the seeds get stuck in your teeth." "Well, then," said Sister, "let's go out and twist each other up on the swing and see who gets the dizziest." Brother thought about that. "No," he said. "That's silly, and besides, we did that yesterday." Sister became irritated and impatient with her brother. "My goodness!" she complained. "You don't want to do anything. All you want to do is sit there and hug that soccer ball. I think you must be in love with that soccer ball!" "I am not!" protested Brother. "But I'll tell you something–I bet I can dribble this ball past you!" Brother was a pretty good soccer player and a very good dribbler. But so was Sister. The only one who saw what happened next, besides the cubs, was a mockingbird who was perched on a twig outside an open window. Brother faced Sister. The ball was on the floor between them. First Brother moved the ball with his right foot, then with his left, trying to trick Sister out of position. Then, quick as a flash, he gave the ball a sharp kick with his right. It almost worked. But Sister was fast too. She reached out with her knee and blocked the ball, which bounced against a bookshelf, against a chair, against a footstool, and into Mama's most favorite lamp, which fell to the floor with a crash. The mockingbird let out a screech and got out of there as fast as its wings could carry it. As it flew away it saw Mama Bear returning from the marketplace! Now, the Bear family had some house rules just as any family has. One was "No honey eating in bed." Another was "No tracking mud on the clean floors." And another was "No ball playing in the house!" What to do? Brother looked at Sister. Sister looked at Brother. They both looked at the broken lamp. And they both listened in horror as Mama came up the front steps and into the hose. All Brother had time to do before Mama came into the room was roll the ball behind Papa's chair. "My lamp!" said Mama. "My best lamp! What happened?" she asked, looking into her cubs' eyes. "Tell me about it." The cubs looked into Mama's eyes, then at each other, and then they began to tell one of the biggest whoppers that has ever been told in Bear Country. "It was a bird!" began Brother. "Yes," added Sister, "a big purple bird with yellow feet!" "And green wing tips," added Brother. "And funny-looking red feathers sticking out of its head," said Sister, as a finishing tough. As most lies do, the purple bird whopper got bigger and bigger and bigger. "Yes," continued the cubs, "and it flew in that window, zoomed around the room, and knocked over the lamp!" As Mama Bear was looking at the broken lamp with a sad expression on her face, Papa Bear came in from his shop. The cubs began to tell him the story of the big bird that flew in the window and broke the lamp. It was harder to tell the second time. For one thing, they couldn't quite remember how they had told it the first time. "You've got me confused," said Papa. "Was it a purple bird with green wing tips and yellow feet?" "Or a yellow bird with purple wing tips and green feet?" "Or...was it a white bird with black spots...like that soccer ball behind my easy chair?" But the thing that really made it hard the second time was how very sad Mama looked as she picked up the pieces of the broken lamp. "Mama, we're really sorry about the lamp," said Brother. "Oh, yes!" said Sister, picking up the last piece and putting it in the dust pan. "Oh," said Mama, "I'm not worried about the lamp. We can always get another lamp, or we can glue this one back together. What I ‘m sad about is the thought that maybe, just maybe, my cubs, whom I've always trusted, aren't telling me the truth. And trust is not something you can put back together again." Both cubs started to talk at once. "It wasn't a bird!" said Sister. "It was a soccer ball." "And it was all my fault!" shouted Brother. "It was just as much my fault!" shouted Sister. But they were both shouted down by the phone, which rang loudly. It was Grizzly Gran inviting the Bear family for a Sunday visit. "Hello, Gran!" said Mama. "Oh, everything is just fine here in the tree house. How is everything with you?" "But, Mama!" protested Sister after Mama hung up the phone. "You told Gran that everything is fine here, and that isn't really the truth." Nobody really expects cubs to be perfect, and from time to time Brother and Sister Bear did forget the rules. Brother ate honey in bed a couple of times. One time Sister tracked a little mud on the clean floor. And once or twice Brother and Sister started to play ball in the hose before they remembered not to. But they ever, ever again told a whopper...before trust is one thing you can't put back together once it's broken.  11. 1985 Forget their Manners There was trouble in the big tree house down a sunny dirt road deep in Bear Country–trouble with manners. The Bear family's trouble with manners was that they forgot them! At first it was just an occasional "please" or "thank you" that was forgotten. Then there was a rude push without an "excuse me." Then a reach across the table instead of a "please pass the broccoli." Mama Bear wasn't quite sure how or why it happened. But she was sure of one thing–whatever the reason, the Bear family had become a pushing, shoving, name-calling, ill-mannered mess! At the table it was even worse. They were a grabbing, mouth-stuffing, food-fighting, kicking-under-the-table super mess! Of course, Mama Bear tried to correct Brother and Sister Bear's behavior. She tried coaxing. She tried complaining. She tried shouting! She tried going to Papa for help (though it sometimes seemed to Mama that he was part of the problem). Papa banged on the table and shouted as only he could shout. But nothing really seemed to do any good. Mama didn't like what was happening to her family. Not one bit. Something had to be done. But what? The best way to fight bad habits, she thought, was with good habits. Then she thought of a plan. She got a big piece of cardboard and a marker. At the top she wrote: THE BEAR FAMILY POLITENESS PLAN When the plan was finished, she called a family meeting and showed it to Papa and the cubs. It certainly got the Bear family's attention! Mama's plan had a list of all the rude things she wanted to stop. Beside each one was a penalty–a job or chore that went with it. If you forgot a "please" or a "thank you," you had to sweep the front steps. If you pushed or shoved, you had to beat two rugs. If you got caught name calling, you had to clean the whole cellar! "But, Mama!" sputtered the cubs. "You're not being fair!" "It seems to me," she said, "that you're the ones who aren't being fair–to yourselves or anyone else. That's what manners are all about–being fair and considerate. Manners are very important. They help us get along with each other. Why, without manners–" "Your mama's absolutely right!" interrupted Papa. "Thank you, Papa, for your comment. But interrupting is number three on Rude List, and the penalty is dusting the downstairs." mama said, and handed him the feather duster. "Hmm," said Brother. "This looks serious I think we'd better come up with a plan of our own or we're going to be doing a lot of extra chores." "What sort of plan?" asked Sister. "Well," he said, "instead of just being polite, we'll be super polite. We'll please and thank you so much that Mama will get fed up and call the whole thing off!" "Yes," said Sister. "We'll be so polite, she won't be able to stand it!" They put their plan into action. They were super polite... –on the stairs: "After you, Sister dear!" "Thank you, dear Brother!"–in the hall: "Excuse me, Brother dear!" "Why, certainly, my dear Sister!"–waiting for the bathroom: "Terribly sorry to have kept you waiting!" "Think nothing of it, my dear!" But it didn't work the way they expected. Mama didn't get fed up at all. And after a while Brother and Sister forgot about being super polite and were just polite...–at the table: "Pass the honey, please." "Certainly."–in their room: "Would you like me to help you pick up your toys?" "Thank you very much."–in the yard: "Oops! Sorry–I didn't mean to bump you." "That's all right. No harm done." And it turned out that Mama had been right: thinks did go more smoothly. Once they got into the good manners habit, they didn't even have to think about it. But it wasn't so easy for Papa. He was the one who got fed up. It's a little harder to change habits when you're older, and he had to do quite a few extra chores for forgetting his manners. "I'm glad to get out of the house, away from that Politeness Plan!" he said as he drove the family along the highway on a trip to the supermarket. "Manners and courtesy are just as important away from home–especially on the road," said Mama as they stopped at a stop sign to let pedestrians and other cars pass. "They help us drive safely." "Well," grumbled Papa as they all went into the busy supermarket, "I think you can have too much of a good thing–you've got to have common sense along with manners!! Why if you let everyone go ahead of you at the checkout, you'd be there forever! "And sometimes you have to interrupt–Excuse me, madam," he interrupted a shopper, "but I believe you have a leaking bottle in your cart!" The shopper thanked him for his help. "You see?" he said, driving home. "There's more to life than remembering your manners. Besides, manners are all right for cubs and mama bears...but we papa bears have other things to think about–"At that moment the car in front stopped suddenly and Papa bumped into it. He was furious. "Why, that pinheaded fiddlebrain!" he snarled. "Name calling!" reminded Sister. The penalty for name calling was cleaning the whole cellar, so Papa gritted his teeth and remembered his manners. And a good thing, too. Because climbing out of the other car was the biggest, angriest bear he had ever seen. But when the angry bear saw how polite Papa was, he remembered his manners too. He explained that he had stopped short because a mama duck and her ducklings had crossed in front of him. Then he and Papa Bear looked at their bumpers and saw that no harm had been done. "As I was saying," said Papa as they continued on their way, "it's very important for us to remember our manners at all times–and I want to thank you, Sister, for reminding me to remember mine." "You're very welcome, I'm sure," said Sister Bear politely. THE BEAR FAMILY POLITENESS PLAN RUDENESS FORGETTING "PLEASE" OR "THANK YOU" PUSHING OR SHOVING INTERRUPTING NAME CALLING REACHING AT TABLE PLAYING WITH FOOD UDE NOISES BANGING DOOR FORGETTING "EXCUSE ME" HOGGING BATHROOM PENALTY SWEEP FRONT STEPS BEAT 2 RUGS DUST DOWNSTAIRS CLEAN CELLAR CLEAN YARD WASH DISHES WEED GARDEN CLEAN ATTIC EMPTY GARGAGE PUT OUT TRASHSILLYHEAD! FUZZBRAIN! NOODLEPUSS! THE BEAR FAMILY POLITENESS PLAN THE BEAR FAMILY POLITENESS PLAN RUDENESS FORGETTING "PLEASE" OR "THANK YOU" PUSHING OR SHOVING INTERRUPTING NAME CALLING REACHING AT TABLE PLAYING WITH FOOD UDE NOISES BANGING DOOR FORGETTING "EXCUSE ME" HOGGING BATHROOM PENALTY SWEEP FRONT STEPS BEAT 2 RUGS DUST DOWNSTAIRS CLEAN CELLAR CLEAN YARD WASH DISHES WEED GARDEN CLEAN ATTIC EMPTY GARGAGE PUT OUT TRASH TOYS STOP BONK! B.BEARS DUCK CROSSING16. 1987 The BAD HABITSister Bear, who lived with her mama, papa, and brother in the big tree house down a sunny dirt road deep in Bear Country, had been going to school for a quite a while. First there had been nursery school, which was pure fun–playing with dolls and blocks, rolling clay snakes, and scribbling with crayons. Next had come kindergarten. That was fun too. There were marching games and rhythm band. She also learned a lot of numbers in kindergarten–and most of the alphabet. Now Sister was in first grade. Regular school was different. It was still fun and she liked Teacher Jane very much, but it wasn't all fun. There was quite a lot of work–spelling, number problems, all kinds of things. In regular school you have to concentrate–and sometimes when you concentrate, you form little nervous habits. That's what happened to some of the cubs in Teacher Jane's class. Lizzy twirled her fur. Twirl, twirl, twirl. Freddy scratched his head. Scratch, scratch, scratch. Norman sucked his thumb. Suck, suck, suck. And Sister nibbled her nails. Nibble, nibble, nibble, nibble. Before she knew it, she had nibbled them down to nubbins. In fact, she nibbled them down so far that some of her fingers were getting sore. "Oh, dear!" said Mama Bear to Sister when the cubs got home from school one day. "You've nibbled yur nails down to nubbins. In fact, you've nibbled them cleaned off. How did it happen?" "I'm not exactly sure, Mama," Sister said. "But some of them are getting sore." "Hmm," said Mama. "Well, here's what we'll do. We'll put a little medicine on the sore ones and bits of adhesive tape on all of them. That will remind you not to nibble and will give them a change to grow back" The bits of tape helped Sister remember not to nibble, but they also got in the way when she tried to do certain things. It's very hard to hole a pencil with tape all over your fingertips, or tune the TV, or scratch when you have an itch. But worst of all, the bits of tape told the whole world that Sister Bear was a nail biter. The next morning, when sister lined up for school, Lizzy Bruin and some others began pointing and teasing. "Sister nibbles her nails! Sister nibbles her nails!" It didn't take Sister long to decide to pull off those bits of tape! And without the tape, she forgot to remember not to nibble. She forgot during school. She forgot on the bus. She even forgot as she and Brother climbed off the bus. "You're going to have to cut that out, Sis," said Brother, "or you'll get to e a regular full-time nail biter." "I'm afraid your brother's right," said Mama, who was organizing the wheelbarrow for some garden work. "I don't mean to ng, but nail biting is a very difficult habit to break." "Habit?" asked Sister, making fists so that her nubby, nibbled-off nails wouldn't show. "What's a habit?" "That's a good question," said Mama. "Come along while I plant these tulip bulbs Grizzly Gran sent over and we'll talk about it. "A habit," Mama said as she pushed the wheelbarrow along the well-worn path, "is something you do so often you don't even have to think about it. Habits are a very important part of our lives. And most of them are good–like brushing your teeth and combing your fur when you get up in the morning, and looking both ways before you cross a road. But some habits aren't so good." "Like nail biting?" asked Sister. "You would like to have your nice nails grow back, wouldn't you?" as Mama's answer. "Oh, yes!" said Sister. "But I keep forgetting! Why is it so hard to remember?" "Well," said Mama, "it's sort of like this path. I've wheeled this barrow over it so many times that it's worn a deep rut right down the middle. And it keeps getting deeper every time I use it. Why, it's so deep now that I can't get out of it without a little help." "That's the way it is with a bad habit–the more you use it, the harder it is to get out of it. Here, this is where I want to plant the bulbs." "What about my nail-biting habit?" asked Sister as she helped Mama out of the deep rut. "How am I going to get out of it?" "You just need a little help, that's all," said Mama. "Let's lant Gran's tulips while I think about it. And later I'll talk to your papa. He may have some ideas." "I could read the riot act to her," suggested Papa. "You know: ‘Nail biting is an outrageous, disgraceful habit and if you don't stop it immediately–‘" "Dear me, no!" said Mama. "Nail biting is a kind of nervous habit, and shouting and threatening will just make her more nervous." "I suppose so," said Papa thoughtfully. "Perhaps some sort of reward would help. A bit of money–Let's say a dime for every day she doesn't bite her nails." Before Mama could answer, Sister Bear, who had been nervously nibbling in the next room, popped in and said, "A dime–ten whole cents every day just for not biting my nails?" "That's right," said Papa. "Until the habit's broken." "I'll never nibble again!" she said as she thought of all those lovely dimes she was going to get. But the way it turned out, she didn't get a single dime. All she got was discouraged. A day is a long time and habits are powerful–especially bad habits. Even with the promise of a dime, Sister couldn't remember not to nibble. Mama and Papa got discouraged too. "Oh, well," sighed Mama. "Life goes on. I must call Gran and thank her for the tulip bulbs." "Oh, you're very welcome, my dear," said Gran when Mama called. "And how is everything at your house?... Is that so?...You know, I was a nail biter when I was a cub and my mama helped me to stop. What have you tried so far?... Um... Uh-huh... Well, I think you're on the right track with the dime, but instead of a dime, and instead of giving it to her at the end of the day..." "What an interesting idea," said Mama as she listened to wise old Grizzly Gran. So they tried Gran's idea. Instead of a dime at the end of each day, they gave Sister ten pennies–one for each nail–at the beginning of each day. Ten pennies to keep–unless she nibbled. And with those pennies in her pocket, jiggling when she got on the school bus, jingling when she jumped rope in the schoolyard...just waiting to be remembered when some nail decided it needed a nibble...the plan worked! Not perfectly. It's hard to break a habit, and Sister had to give back some of those pennies. But in ten days she had ninety-three pennies! But even better: she had ten fine fingernails. Great for picking things up, turning the TV, and scratching itches. And the next time she played jacks she got all the way to tensies! "Phew!" said Papa Bear. "I'm glad that's over." "Yes, indeed!" agreed Mama, breathing a great sigh of relief. That's when Brother Bear looked at his fingernails and piped up, "You know, I think I might start biting my nails–I could use the money." "I certainly hope you're joking!" roared Papa. "Because if you're not–" "I'm joking. I'm joking," interrupted Brother.  And he was–sort of.11111 2222 3333 4444 Aa Aa Bb Bb CcCc HAT BAT CAT BALL TALL WALL UP/DOWN BIG/SMALL OUT/IN 3+4=7 3+4=7 2+5=7 2+5=7 SCHOOL BUS18. 1988 The Bad dream Brother Bear was just crazy about Space Grizzlies. Space Grizzlies were little toy action figures that you could collect. Sister Bear didn't like them much. She thought they were dumb (and a little scary). Mama Bear didn't mind them except when Brother brought them to the table or left them on the stairs. Papa Bear didn't care about them one way or the other. But Brother cared about them a lot. He cared about them so much that he did chores for neighbors to make extra money so he could buy more. He had quite a few. But the store had more. A lot more. He was saving up to buy Sleezo's Cloud Castle. Sleezo was the evilest of all the Space Grizzlies, and the wicked-looking Cloud Castle was where he planned all his evil deeds. When Brother had saved enough money, he went along on a shopping trip to the Bear Country Mall and made his purchase. The Cloud Castle came in a big box, and he could hardly wait to get home to play with it. But as he was getting into the car, he saw something that was even more exciting than the Cloud Castle. It was a movie poster. It said: COMING SOON. SPACE GRIZZLIES–THE MOVIE! "A Space Grizzlies movie!" he cried. "It looks great! I can't wait to see it!" "I can," said Sister. "Looks scary to me." "May I see it when it comes, Mama?" asked Brother. "May I, please?" "Hmm," said Mama. "We'll see when the time comes." When they got home, Brother opened his new Cloud Castle, got out all his Space Grizzlies, and was all set to play the biggest Space Grizzly game ever. But... he had nobody to play with. Nobody, that is, except Sister. "Want to play Space Grizzlies, Sis?" he asked. "No way," she said. "Aw, come on," he said. "I'll play any game you want if you'll play Space Grizzlies with me." "Any three games," she said driving a hard bargain. "Which three?" he asked warily. "Papa dolls, jacks, and beanbags," she answered. "Papa dolls, jacks, and beanbags!" he protested. "Give me a break!" "Take it or leave it," she said. He took it. And after some lively sessions of paper dolls, jacks, and beanbags, it was time for...–SPACE GRIZZLIES! "I am Sleezo, evil king of the universe! roared Brother. "Calling all spaceships! Seek and destroy the planet Magongo, home of my sworn enemy, Heero the Magnificent!" "Oh, no, you don't!" Sister shouted back. "I am Heero the Magnificent! One touch from my sleep wand and your evil ways will be ended!" They played until Mama called them for dinner.  "Brother," said Mama, "how many times must I tell you–no Space Grizzlers at the table!" Papa was taking a peek at the Bear Country News. "Brother," he said, "that movie of yours starts tomorrow." "May I see it, Mama, please?" asked Brother. "I don't know why not," she said. "Why haven't been to the movies in a while." "I know why not," said Sister. "Because it's scary." "That's no problem," said Papa. "There are lots of movies to choose from." He was right. The Bear Country Theater was really four movie houses in one, and there were usually four different movies playing. "This looks good," said Mama. "The Magic Toeshoes. It's a musical about a ballerina." So when they got to the movies to the next evening. Mama, Papa, and Sister got in line for The Magic Toeshoes, and Brother joined a bunch of his friends in line for Space Grizzlies. The Magic Toeshoes told the story of a young bear who wanted to e a ballerina. But every time she tried to dance on her toes she wiggled and wobbled. The old ballet master took pity on her and gave her a pair of magic toeshoes which cured her wiggles and wobbles. But on the night of the big ballet, she left her magic toeshoes on the bus! Without them she was all wiggles and wobbles again. That's when the ballet master told her they weren't magic at all! They were just ordinary toeshoes. The wobbly ballerina got her confidence back and danced beautifully ever after. The Space Grizzly movie was about Space Grizzlies, of course: great monstrous big-screen ones who zapped and zoomed through space until that final intergalactic shootout. It was very exciting and not a little scary. It was dark when the Bear family got home, so it was off to be for the cubs. It was already late for Sister, and she went right to sleep. But Brother was so excited by the movie that he lay awake for quite a while. He was just about to doze off when Sister woke up screaming. "Hel-lp!" she screamed. "They're after me!" "Who's after you? asked Brother. "Space Grizzlies!" she wailed. "Thousands of them!" "Calm down, sillyhead. It's only a dream," he said. But Sister leaped out of bed and ran into Mama and Papa's room. The little silly, Brother thought. Imagine–being afraid of a dopey dream. Then he yawned, turned over, and went to sleep. Mama and Papa tried to calm Sister. They took her into their bed and hugged her. "Tell us about your dream," said Mama. "Dream?" Sister said. "Yes," said Papa. "You must have had a nightmare. That's the word for a bad dream." "But it was so real!" she said, calming down a bit. "That's how it is with dreams," he said. "it's as if they're really happening, but they're not–they're just in your mind." "Can you tell us your ream? asked Mama. "It was awful!" Sister said. "I was a ballet star dancing on my toes, and then the stage turned into a giant beanbag board and the Space Grizzlies came out of the beanbag holes and chased me and I fell down one of the holes." "I kept falling and falling and then I woke up. It was awful!" she sailed again, and buried her face in Mama's nightgown. "I'm sure it was, sweetie," said Mama. "But it was also very interesting." "Interesting?" Sister said in a puzzled voice. "Oh yes," said Mama. "you see, even though you go to sleep, your mind keeps right on thinking. But it doesn't think in a sensible way. It takes all the things you were thinking or were nervous about during the day and puts them together all jumbled like a mixed-up zigsaw puzzle." "You mean–like the ballet dancer from the movie?" said Sister. "Sure," said Papa. "And the beanbag board from playing beanbags with Brother–" she added. "And the Space Grizzlies–" began Mama. "Where from playing Space Grizzlies with Brother and from seeing the movie poster!" Sister said. "Exactly," said Papa. "Say," she said. "That is interesting!" That's when they heard Brother. "Hel-l-lp!" he screamed. "They're after me! They're after me!" Then he raced into the room, jumped into the bed, and hid his face in Papa's pajamas. "Calm down, son" said Papa. "It was just a bad dream." "A nightmare," added Sister. "That's another word for bad dream." "Can you tell us about it?" asked Mama. "Well, I was eating dinner and the food turned into Space Grizzlies–gigantic ones, and they chased me and I turned into a paper doll and my clothes were flying off! It was awful!" "You're awake now, dear," said Mama. "Everything's going to be all right." "But Mama," he said, "it was so real." "Of course it was," said Sister. "That's the way dreams are. Let me explain it to you." And she did. Some dreams make cubs laugh. Some dreams make them cry. It's interesting to think about what they dream and why.SPACE GRIZZLIES HEADQUARTERS TOYS BEAR COUNTRY BARN THEATER COMING SOON SPACE GRIZZLIES THE MOVIE SPACE DOOR BUT STOP